---
title: "Poems"
date: '2018-12-24'
slug: poems
---

<center>__Apps__</center>

<center>BY 苏木七</center>

<center>My scale has an app.</center>
<center>My thermometer has an app.</center>
<center>My watch has an app.</center>
<center>My earphone has an app.</center>
<center>My heater has an app.</center>
<center>My sex toy has an app.</center>
<center>Also I just got a cup that has an app.</center>
<center>TVs, cars, houses,</center>
<center>Coffee machine, Vitamix blender, vacuum cleaner,</center>
<center>They all have apps.</center>
<center>Well, in this apped-up world, why is there still no app for ourselves?</center>
<center>An app for our metabolism, our hormones, </center>
<center>Our temper, our genes, </center>
<center>Our sincerest feelings, our wildest dreams,</center>
<center>Our deepest fear, and our earnest desire.</center>

<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>



<center>__The Phoenix and the Turtle（凤凰和斑鸠）__</center>

<center>BY William Shakespeare</center>

<center>Let the bird of loudest lay </center>
<center>On the sole Arabian tree </center>
<center>Herald sad and trumpet be, </center>
<center>To whose sound chaste wings obey. </center>

<center>But thou shrieking harbinger, </center>
<center>Foul precurrer of the fiend, </center>
<center>Augur of the fever's end, </center>
<center>To this troop come thou not near. </center>

<center>From this session interdict </center>
<center>Every fowl of tyrant wing, </center>
<center>Save the eagle, feather'd king; </center>
<center>Keep the obsequy so strict. </center>

<center>Let the priest in surplice white, </center>
<center>That defunctive music can, </center>
<center>Be the death-divining swan, </center>
<center>Lest the requiem lack his right. </center>

<center>And thou treble-dated crow, </center>
<center>That thy sable gender mak'st </center>
<center>With the breath thou giv'st and tak'st, </center>
<center>'Mongst our mourners shalt thou go. </center>

<center>Here the anthem doth commence: </center>
<center>Love and constancy is dead; </center>
<center>Phoenix and the Turtle fled </center>
<center>In a mutual flame from hence. </center>

<center>So they lov'd, as love in twain </center>
<center>Had the essence but in one; </center>
<center>Two distincts, division none: </center>
<center>Number there in love was slain. </center>

<center>Hearts remote, yet not asunder; </center>
<center>Distance and no space was seen </center>
<center>'Twixt this Turtle and his queen: </center>
<center>But in them it were a wonder. </center>

<center>So between them love did shine </center>
<center>That the Turtle saw his right </center>
<center>Flaming in the Phoenix' sight: </center>
<center>Either was the other's mine. </center>

<center>Property was thus appalled </center>
<center>That the self was not the same; </center>
<center>Single nature's double name </center>
<center>Neither two nor one was called. </center>

<center>Reason, in itself confounded, </center>
<center>Saw division grow together, </center>
<center>To themselves yet either neither, </center>
<center>Simple were so well compounded; </center>

<center>That it cried, "How true a twain </center>
<center>Seemeth this concordant one! </center>
<center>Love has reason, reason none, </center>
<center>If what parts can so remain." </center>

<center>Whereupon it made this threne </center>
<center>To the Phoenix and the Dove, </center>
<center>Co-supremes and stars of love, </center>
<center>As chorus to their tragic scene: </center>

<center>threnos</center>

<center>Beauty, truth, and rarity, </center>
<center>Grace in all simplicity, </center>
<center>Here enclos'd, in cinders lie. </center>

<center>Death is now the Phoenix' nest, </center>
<center>And the Turtle's loyal breast </center>
<center>To eternity doth rest, </center>

<center>Leaving no posterity: </center>
<center>'Twas not their infirmity, </center>
<center>It was married chastity. </center>

<center>Truth may seem but cannot be; </center>
<center>Beauty brag but 'tis not she; </center>
<center>Truth and beauty buried be. </center>

<center>To this urn let those repair </center>
<center>That are either true or fair; </center>
<center>For these dead birds sigh a prayer.</center>

<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>


<center>__The Dole of the King’s Daughter__</center>

<center>BY Oscar Wilde (1854–1900)</center>

<center>Seven stars in the still water,</center>
<center>And seven in the sky;</center>
<center>Seven sins on the King’s daughter,</center>
<center>Deep in her soul to lie.</center>

<center>Red roses are at her feet,</center>
<center>(Roses are red in her red-gold hair)</center>
<center>And O where her bosom and girdle meet</center>
<center>Red roses are hidden there.</center>

<center>Fair is the knight who lieth slain</center>
<center>Amid the rush and reed,</center>
<center>See the lean fishes that are fain</center>
<center>Upon dead men to feed.</center>

<center>Sweet is the page that lieth there,</center>
<center>(Cloth of gold is goodly prey)</center>
<center>See the black ravens in the air,</center>
<center>Black, O black as the night are they.</center>

<center>What do they there so stark and dead?</center>
<center>(There is blood upon her hand)</center>
<center>Why are the lilies flecked with red?</center>
<center>(There is blood on the river sand.)</center>

<center>There are two that ride from the south and east,</center>
<center>And two from the north and west,</center>
<center>For the black raven a goodly feast,</center>
<center>For the King’s daughter rest.</center>

<center>There is one man who loves her truecenter>
<center>(Red, O red, is the stain of gore!)</center>
<center>He hath duggen a grave by the darksome yew,</center>
<center>(One grave will do for four.)</center>

<center>No moon in the still heaven,</center>
<center>In the black water none,</center>
<center>The sins on her soul are seven,</center>
<center>The sin upon his is one.</center>

<a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7pgEZchOsZs"target="_blank">The Dole of the King's Daughter</a> BY Caprice 

Caprice is a neo-classical ensemble from Russia distinguished by Inna Brejestovskaya's heavenly voice and an acoustic sound (harp, flute, clarinet, violin, cello) with a touch of electronics.

Members - Anton Brejestovski, Inna Brejestovskaya, Vladimir Bobovnikov, Blad Komissarchuk, Dmitry Gavrilin, Irina Stolyarova, Mariya Voronina, Alexandra Korzina & Alexey Grigoriev


